SETUP_COMPLETE.md, before:

# Installation Complete! ✅

## What Has Been Installed

### ✅ Dependencies Installed
- **PHP 8.5.0** - Installed and verified
- **Composer 2.9.2** - Installed and dependencies loaded
- **PostgreSQL 15.15** - Installed and running
- **Vendor dependencies** - Composer autoloader created

### ✅ Database Setup
- **Database created**: `blacknova`
- **User created**: `bnt`
- **Schema loaded**: All tables created
- **Universe created**: 1000 sectors, 200 planets, 40,000+ links
- **Scheduler tables**: Created and configured

### ✅ Configuration
- **.env file**: Created with database credentials
- **Environment variables**: Configured for PostgreSQL connection

### ✅ Code Fixes Applied
- Fixed `create_universe.php` to use NULL instead of 0 for planet owners
- Fixed `PlanetController` instantiation in `index.php`
- Fixed `login.php` view to use `$session` instead of `$this->session`
- Created `router.php` for PHP built-in server

## How to Start the Server

### Option 1: PHP Built-in Server (Development)
```bash
cd /Users/dave/but/public
php -S localhost:8000 router.php
```

Then visit: **http://localhost:8000**

### Option 2: Apache/Nginx (Production)
Point your web server's document root to:
```
/Users/dave/but/public
```

## Database Connection

The application is configured to connect to:
- **Host**: localhost
- **Port**: 5432
- **Database**: blacknova
- **User**: bnt
- **Password**: bnt

To change these, edit `/Users/dave/but/.env`

## PostgreSQL PATH

PostgreSQL 15 is installed but not in your default PATH. To use PostgreSQL commands, add to your `~/.zshrc`:

```bash
export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@15/bin:$PATH"
```

Or use the full path:
```bash
/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@15/bin/psql -h localhost -U bnt -d blacknova
```

## Next Steps

1. **Start the server** using one of the methods above
2. **Visit http://localhost:8000** in your browser
3. **Register a new account** to start playing
4. **Enjoy BlackNova Traders!**

## Verification

To verify everything is working:
```bash
# Check database
export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@15/bin:$PATH"
psql -h localhost -U bnt -d blacknova -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM universe;"

# Check PHP
php -v

# Check Composer
composer --version
```

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues:
1. Make sure PostgreSQL is running: `brew services list | grep postgresql`
2. Check database connection: `psql -h localhost -U bnt -d blacknova`
3. Verify .env file exists: `cat /Users/dave/but/.env`
4. Check PHP errors in server output

## Server Status

The PHP development server should be running on port 8000.
If not, start it with:
```bash
cd /Users/dave/but/public && php -S localhost:8000 router.php
```

Commit message:

Document localhost vs 0.0.0.0 server binding options
- Add explanation of localhost (127.0.0.1) vs 0.0.0.0 binding
- localhost: only accessible from local machine (more secure)
- 0.0.0.0: accessible from network devices (useful for mobile testing)
- Update server startup instructions with both options

SETUP_COMPLETE.md, after:

# Installation Complete! ✅

## What Has Been Installed

### ✅ Dependencies Installed
- **PHP 8.5.0** - Installed and verified
- **Composer 2.9.2** - Installed and dependencies loaded
- **PostgreSQL 15.15** - Installed and running
- **Vendor dependencies** - Composer autoloader created

### ✅ Database Setup
- **Database created**: `blacknova`
- **User created**: `bnt`
- **Schema loaded**: All tables created
- **Universe created**: 1000 sectors, 200 planets, 40,000+ links
- **Scheduler tables**: Created and configured

### ✅ Configuration
- **.env file**: Created with database credentials
- **Environment variables**: Configured for PostgreSQL connection

### ✅ Code Fixes Applied
- Fixed `create_universe.php` to use NULL instead of 0 for planet owners
- Fixed `PlanetController` instantiation in `index.php`
- Fixed `login.php` view to use `$session` instead of `$this->session`
- Created `router.php` for PHP built-in server

## How to Start the Server

### Option 1: PHP Built-in Server (Development)

**Localhost only (default - only accessible from this computer):**
```bash
cd /Users/dave/but/public
php -S localhost:8000 router.php
```
Then visit: **http://localhost:8000**

**All network interfaces (accessible from other devices on your network):**
```bash
cd /Users/dave/but/public
php -S 0.0.0.0:8000 router.php
```
Then visit: **http://localhost:8000** (local) or **http://YOUR_IP:8000** (from other devices)

**Note:** Using `0.0.0.0` makes the server accessible from other devices on your network. Use `localhost` for local-only access (more secure).

### Option 2: Apache/Nginx (Production)
Point your web server's document root to:
```
/Users/dave/but/public
```

## Database Connection

The application is configured to connect to:
- **Host**: localhost
- **Port**: 5432
- **Database**: blacknova
- **User**: bnt
- **Password**: bnt

To change these, edit `/Users/dave/but/.env`

## PostgreSQL PATH

PostgreSQL 15 is installed but not in your default PATH. To use PostgreSQL commands, add to your `~/.zshrc`:

```bash
export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@15/bin:$PATH"
```

Or use the full path:
```bash
/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@15/bin/psql -h localhost -U bnt -d blacknova
```

## Next Steps

1. **Start the server** using one of the methods above
2. **Visit http://localhost:8000** in your browser
3. **Register a new account** to start playing
4. **Enjoy BlackNova Traders!**

## Verification

To verify everything is working:
```bash
# Check database
export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@15/bin:$PATH"
psql -h localhost -U bnt -d blacknova -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM universe;"

# Check PHP
php -v

# Check Composer
composer --version
```

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues:
1. Make sure PostgreSQL is running: `brew services list | grep postgresql`
2. Check database connection: `psql -h localhost -U bnt -d blacknova`
3. Verify .env file exists: `cat /Users/dave/but/.env`
4. Check PHP errors in server output

## Server Status

The PHP development server should be running on port 8000.
If not, start it with:
```bash
# Localhost only (default)
cd /Users/dave/but/public && php -S localhost:8000 router.php

# Or for network access (accessible from other devices)
cd /Users/dave/but/public && php -S 0.0.0.0:8000 router.php
```
